hi I'm Ben and this is the house I built
out of shipping containers now I've been
interested in shipping container
architecture for quite some time but I
had a really hard time finding good
information about how to get building
permits or how much would it cost well
we did the research we documented
everything that we did and now we're so
excited to share with you what we
learned so check it out this is episode
3 where we'll install the doors windows
and insulation one of my favorite design
features is this pair of jeld-wen by
folding doors that we installed parallel
to each other
overall we tried to keep the amount of
glass at a minimum since that adds cost
and wherever we add glass we have to cut
away some of the container but we did
splurge on this one dramatic moment that
allows the inside and outside of the
home to merge together so when we left
off in episode 2 we had just been
installing these steel frames for the
openings for these big doors I want to
create a little more visual separation
between these doors and the corrugated
metal so I welded some one-eighth of an
inch thick plate steel to the tube steel
frame I did this on the south side and
even though the motivation was primarily
aesthetic to create some visual relief
this will provide a little bit of
passive solar shading as well we lifted
the top piece into place so that we
could get a precise mark for the length
and then cut it and welded it into place
we cut the side pieces at a slight angle
so that when we welded in the top piece
it would be sloped to shed water now
typically in the environment like this I
would install much longer overhangs but
I'll explain my thinking for these
shorter ones in the design notes at the
end of this episode
these jeld-wen by folding doors came
unassembled which made them easier to
ship prior to assembling the frames we
had already installed some strips of
one-inch thick wood that we will set the
door frames on we've moved the frame
into position check to make sure it was
level and then screwed through the frame
and into the woods surrounding it we
added shims where needed and were
careful not to over drive the screws and
bend or tweak the frame
I hope host the full specs for these
doors on the modern home project website
once the frame was secure we could
stall the door panels one at a time now
I like by folding doors because they
create such visual drama because you can
open them all the way up they can be
however a little bit more finicky and
difficult to operate thence a sliding
glass doors as with most things in life
there's a trade-off but with this
project we decided to go with the visual
drama really capitalize on the view
since this was going to be primarily
used as a vacation house now there was
some gaps between the steel frame that
we welded in and the frame for the doors
we use fire resistant spray foam
insulation to fill in these gaps we're
gonna cover these foam filled gaps with
angle steel and flat bar we sprayed two
pieces first with rusty metal primer and
then welded them in place we use this
piece of angle steel to hide the wood
underneath the door frame and then
welded these really thin half-inch
pieces of angle section to the tube
steel frame and that just covered up
those gaps around the sides
we used a piece of flat bar the
the gap along the top the sparks and
splatter from the welding can damage the
window so make sure you protect them
we were priming the backside of these
pieces of metal trim with rusty metal
primer we had a few people suggest that
we should be using a weld through primer
but then we also heard that these aren't
that great so let us know your opinion
in the comment section below the rest of
the doors are all swing doors that have
glass panels in them these are also from
gelled hwon
once again is just about getting them
nice and level using shims to stabilize
it and then screwing through the door
frames and into the wood around it every
door in this house is technically a
patio door and has glass in it I just
figured if I was going to take the time
to cut an opening I might as well be
letting some light in we used a few
different types of great stuff spray
foam insulation for this house the
reason we used a fire blocking foam on
the outside gaps is so that it wouldn't
catch on fire when we welded on the
steel trim to cover it wallows waiting
for the foam to expand I trimmed the
shims using a multi-tool
Tony had used a 2x8 underneath this door
which was whiter than we needed
so I drill the hole and then trimmed it
with my jigsaw I'm gonna slide a piece
of angle steel over the wood but under
the door sill and I used a chisel just
to shave the wood down a little bit so
it would fit I clean of the metal and
then welded it in place
the foam had expanded but there was
still a few gaps so I just went in one
more time to fill those in I find that
it's easier to do it in multiple passes
than to try to overspray and then have
to clean up all that mess once the foam
had fully cured I took a knife and
trimmed it flush to the doorframe
now I can weld in a piece of angle
section that will cover that gap end a
piece of flat bar at the top
there's still another window to do and
we did this the same as before just
applying some caulk on the inside of the
steel frame and then securing the window
through the nailing flange with
self-tapping screws if I was to do this
again I think I would have installed the
windows from the outside and then
created a second trim piece to cover the
nailing flanges with the window secured
we then added an additional two by fours
around it and then screwed through the
window and into that wood now for the
inside gaps around the windows and doors
we used a window and door great stuff
this version is formulated so that won't
over expand and Bend the window and door
frames we also took regular great stuff
and started foaming around all the
framing we really focused on the ill
regular nooks and crannies there would
be difficult to fill with rigid
insulation this spray foam is helping to
seal up all the little gaps in the
construction which will greatly reduce
our air infiltration and improve the
energy performance we also started the
electrical Ruffins which involved
installing all the electrical boxes and
running the wires
this is the last chance to walk through
the entire house and really make sure
you have all the switches and outlets
exactly where you want them
designed like this I would specify spray
foam insulation but since we want to do
it ourselves we chose to use rigid
insulation which is easy to cut with a
box cutter we're going to use a
combination of 2-inch thick one inch
thick and 1/2 inch thick rigid
insulation to fill in the gaps in
between the two by fours for the
ceilings we started with pieces of
2-inch thick insulation which we put on
top of the double sill plate and they
kind of fit nicely up there
later we taped in
between the seems to seal each layer
now no one on this team had ever built a
shipping container house before so we
were definitely learning as we went and
one of the things we like to do was to
build a head on one small area of the
house this way we could kind of test out
our construction systems see how
everything would sort of go together and
then make better informed decisions as
we applied it over the majority of the
construction so we insulated this one
end wall and then sheath it with half
inch thick OSB later on we would switch
to plywood because it has a little bit
less formal dehyde than the OSB
now some of the biggest gaps are between
the corners of the steel containers and
the wood framing and here's where I made
it real big mess with spray foam
insulation I was going around just
sealing up all the nooks and crannies
and I kept trying to spray more foam
into that big corner gap I would spray
some in move around to other areas and
then come back and spray a little bit
more in and then it started spreading
and getting kind of out of control
Jesse came in to start measuring and
cutting the insulation panels and if you
keep your eye on the pile you'll just
see it keep growing and growing and
growing
now a number of things went wrong first
we just sprayed in too much too fast
also the air out here in the desert is
quite dry and spray foam cure is a
little bit better if there's a little
bit of moisture so so we learned it
applying a little bit of water with a
spray bottle helps the spray foam expand
and fill out these bigger gaps to fix
this we also took a bunch of scraps of
rigid insulation and stuff them into the
gaps first this way there is a little
bit of structure for the foam to go
around and hang on to there you go all
filled up
we would slide in the first piece of
insulation apply a little bit of spray
foam around the edges and then add in
the additional pieces
we filled in all the gaps and then
sprayed around all the electrical boxes
as well now we have already have some
insulation in between the steel floor
joists but we want a layer of continuous
insulation on top of it so we're gonna
apply these subfloor insulated panels
these are a really cool product that are
often used for remodeling basements and
it's just a layer of OSB laminated to
foam they cut easily with a circular saw
and then you can just glue them down to
the floor using liquid nails subfloor
adhesive
for the pieces around the door we
trimmed just the OSB part of the panel
so that the phone was slide right
underneath the doors threshold
I really like the system the two foot by
four foot panels were really easy to
handle and the whole installation went
really quick
now we ran out of these panels for the
third container so we decided to come up
with a different way to do it so after
we screwed the plywood floor panels back
down we nailed in two by fours on the
flat side every 16 inches on center
we then filled in these gaps with pieces
of one and a half inch thick foam and
then nail down plywood on top of that
now in general my strategy for this
project was is to use my hired labor to
do the more conventional parts like the
2x4 framing applying the plywood and
insulating well I focused on the steel
work and I think the strategy sort of
makes sense because in most areas it's
easier to find affordable framing labor
than it is to find affordable steel
workers that have welding experience I
want to make a thin plate steel frame to
go around one of the bedroom windows so
I cut and welded pieces of plate steel
together but I was careful to make sure
that there was a bit of a taper on the
top and bottom panels this way water
that lands on it will drain right off
the edge
I prepped the tube steel frame and then
welded on a piece of angle steel that
will serve as a ledge to support this
big trim piece I used magnets to hold
the piece of angle steel level and then
welded it to the tube steel frame
all the welding that I did on this
project was done with my Forney
three-in-one welder I can't recommend
this machine highly enough it's
affordably priced powerful and
incredibly versatile we lifted the trim
piece into place and then welded it to
the tube steel we still didn't have
power to the site at this point so all
this welding had to be done with a
generator we use this Rio B generator
power all the heavy-duty tools and the
welding and then we used our goal zero
system to keep all of the batteries
charged for all of our handheld power
tools it was an effective combination
because it allowed us to keep the noise
down when all we needed to do was charge
batteries but then still have the power
when we needed it shipping containers
have holes so that they can be picked up
with forklifts so I cut some pieces of
eighth inch plate steel Prime the back
of them and then welded them into place
the plumbers cut some notches into this
bottom beam in order to fit in some of
the elbow pieces for their drain pipes
so I just took some of the extra
corrugated steel and cut patches for
those
there are some really big openings at
the ends of the 40-foot container so
again I cut long strips of eighth inch
plate steel and I welded on two small
pieces of angle steel so it have
something to clip my welding ground on
to
the structural engineer required
half-inch eating on all the interior
walls so while I was patching up the
steel the rest of the guys started
cutting and nailing in all the plywood
now this does seem like overkill to me
but I'm not an engineer and I couldn't
find an engineer that would sign off on
it without specifying this type of
sheathing the good news is is that it'll
be really easy to hang pictures in this
house since there will be plywood right
underneath the drywall typically this
type of sheathing is applied on the
outside edge of all the two by fours but
because we started with a complete
container that would have been a little
bit difficult
in our location all new houses have to
have sprinkler systems in them for fire
suppression so we had to wait for a
specialty installer to come and install
all these pipes before adding additional
insulation around them
we installed another layer of insulation
over those pipes with just the sprinkler
heads sticking through now there are a
lot of tasks you can do yourself to save
money but I highly recommend hiring
experts to apply gypsum board an
experienced crew is so fast at it and
they're gonna do a much better job at
muddying taping and sanding than I could
not only would I be struggling
physically with the dexterity for each
one of these steps
I'd be overthinking each process as well
this crew was able to do the whole house
in just two days they screwed on the
panel's mudded and taped the seams
put trim on all the corners
and then did a full skim coat over the
top the skim coat is definitely
something I wouldn't have attempted as a
DIY project because if you aren't able
to apply it perfectly flat you're gonna
spend a whole lot of time sanding
hello in this edition of design those
we're gonna go over what I learned about
reinforcing openings in shipping
containers we're gonna check out the
insulation details and we're gonna talk
a little bit about passive solar
overhangs let's start with why I think
angle steel is a better option for
reinforcing openings than tube steel the
width of the corrugation on a shipping
container is pretty substantial and that
makes it a little bit challenging to get
perfect cutouts even when I went nice
and slow I occasionally had gaps ranging
between an eighth of an inch and a
quarter of an inch it's also very
difficult to hold them in the right
position while you're getting ready to
weld them because there's nothing for
the tube steel frame to rest against the
corners of tube steel have a radius to
them so even if you cut the openings
perfect that radius will slope away from
the corrugated metal that you're trying
to weld it to another issue that's
totally fine for this climate but isn't
ideal over all there isn't any overlap
and that means we're relying a lot just
on the sealant with the angle steel we
have three inches of overlap so even if
the seal and failed it would be hard for
wind-driven rain to get up past that
flange that flange also makes the
installation process a lot easier
because it gives you a positive stop
where you can push the frame all the way
up against the corrugation and even if
you cut the hole a little bit too big
you're still gonna have a lot of these
positive stop points to weld to steel
together the gaps between the
corrugation and the flange on the frame
can be filled with closed cell spray
foam I also think the angle steel just
creates a better looking frame from the
exterior all right let's move on to
insulation for the walls we were able to
get between three and three and a half
inches of insulation which gets us to
about our 19 to 21 for the floors we hit
our 46 but remember the majority of that
has steel going through it so it's not
going to be as effective as the
continuous insulation for the roof we
hit a total of our 48 and 26 of that is
continuous the floors of the container
came with this really thick plywood
there our steel beams underneath it and
in there we just filled in with a lot of
rigid insulation mice and other critters
sometimes like to burrow
rigid insulation so we made sure to seal
along the bottom side steel rail with
some quikrete
precision grout above the plywood is
where we get our nice continuous
insulation using the OSB
insulated panels the sill plate ends up
beneath this panels so we added some
short pieces of 2x4 in between the studs
just to give us a little bit more
material to nail and screw the plywood
and gypsum board to for the roof
insulation it's all about working around
the structural connections the first
continuous layer of two-inch insulation
sits on top of the double 2x4 top plate
and gets pushed right up against a
two-inch tube steel we use two by fours
on joist hangers for the ceiling and was
able to get another continuous layer of
two-inch insulation right above them we
shoved an additional insulation in
between the 2 by 4 ceiling joists but
some of this had to be cut out to make
room for fire sprinklers and the ceiling
lights passive solar design is all about
understanding how Sun angles work and
designing a building so that you let
more Sun in when it's too cold and keep
the Sun out when it's too warm this is
typically done with overhangs above any
windows or doors on the south side of a
building the Sun will be at a steeper
angle during the summer and then it'll
drop to a little bit lower in the winter
so you can size overhangs to keep the
Sun out during the hot summer months but
still let it in to warm up the house in
the winter
typically I would select the length for
these overhangs from a chart of best
practices or if we wanted to get really
precise like I did with my architecture
firm we would actually build a full
energy model to really simulate how the
building is going to work but in both
cases you're taking in a lot of
assumptions and with this project since
I'm actually going to be able to live in
it and measure it I decided to go a
little bit more conservative onto
overhangs at first and then really and
measure and see how well they are
working and only add a little bit more
as needed it's a really cool opportunity
to design in real time and constantly
improve the building and I'm super
excited about measuring these things and
tweaking and adjusting them now
obviously the Sun angles are going to be
different in different parts of the
world
this is a handy chart that I created
with one of my previous designed
companies they kind of separates it into
a few basic groups and then gives you
really good rules of thumb for sizing
your own passive solar overhangs I'll
post this chart on the modern home
project website thanks for watching
episode 3 we're still working on episode
4 we should have it for you soon I know
you've been you've all been waiting and
we appreciate that in episode 4 we're
going to cover the HVAC systems and some
of the other technical aspects of the
home so stay tuned and make sure you hit
that subscribe button if you haven't
already thanks bye